---
title: ISSUE 4 - The E-Collar.
date: 2020-07-26T18:51:00+00:00
description: This is meta description
type: featured
image: "/images/4.jpeg"
categories:
- Nature
tags:
- Fashion
- Nature

---
A large black box on the side of a dogs neck that shocks him every time he leaves a certain parameter, or does a behaviour the owner doesn’t like. Let’s shock our dogs into not doing something. Let’s fill them with fear and send a pulsing electromagnetic field through their nervous system that debilitates them.Now, you have to be pretty sick to want to do that to a dog. The days of using a shock collar on a dog for when they misbehave, are thankfully going. However, some folks are still stuck in the past, and left in the dark when it comes to the E-Collar. So let’s talk about it.When I say to you ‘E-Collar’, your automatic response is probably ‘Shock Collar’. That’s OK. That’s all you’ve heard about it. The emotive human immediately pairs the most obvious electronic aversive in the world, (The Taser) to what they think an E-Collar is. When people don’t understand how the E-Collar works, how it functions, and what its used for, they jump to the defence of the dog. Which is normal, and good, to an extent. If you’re having a conversation about your dog, chances are you don’t want to harm it. If someone gets into dog training, chances are, they love dogs, and don’t want to harm them! So, why do some dog trainers use an E-Collar? Let’s discuss that in a moment, but first, its important to note that you get idiots everywhere. You’re going to get an anecdotal case about a man that shocked his dog and somehow injured it. People have also choked and whipped their dogs with leads and collars, but we don’t associate the lead with a negative connotations. Don’t let the ignorance, and belligerence of others tar your view on what, when used correctly, can be an amazing training tool.The modern day E-Collar uses the same technology as a TENS machine. I’m sure you’ve felt it. It is by no means a shock. It is a stimulation. A feeling. A sensation. When I first put the E-Collar on my Mothers hand so she could feel it, she couldn't stop laughing, because she was preparing for a shock. All she felt was a very mild sensation. Now, there are inferior products on the market that will ‘shock’ your dog, but we stay well away from those.The modern E-Collar isn’t cheap. It sits at around 200-400 euro. It’s an incredible piece of kit. The E-Collar has a range of levels, from 0-100 on most units. Why do you need multiple levels you may think? For safety and various other reasons. My car has a speedometer of 220Km/h, but I’ve never gone past 120Km/h.When we introduce the E-Collar to a dog, we find the dogs working level. This means the lowest possible stimulation the dog responds to. I wouldn’t in a million years have to go even near level 100 with my dog. To put some context behind it, my dog Herbie feels the sensation at level 5. The majority of dogs feel it between levels 4 and 7. Humans don’t tend to feel it until about 8 or 10. I didn’t feel it until level 11, my girlfriend didn’t feel it until 9. It ranges. A friend of mine works his dog on a level 3. These are extremely low levels. We want the dog to feel something, and that is it. We want them to FEEL SOMETHING. We don’t want them to be in pain, or to be frightened, and when introduced correctly, the E-Collar will make your dog come on leaps and bounds.One of the reasons why I love the E-Collar is because of recall. Some skeptics may and say that if you use an E-Collar for recall your lazy, but I’ll protest against a claim like that. I want to know I can get my dog back to me when he’s off leash in every single scenario he’ll ever be in. Around other dogs, other wildlife, traffic, the list goes on. The reason why I go against a statement like ‘If you use an E-Collar for recall you don’t know how to train recall’, is because I don’t teach anything with the E-collar. Most people don’t. All the E-Collar does is reinforce commands and behaviours your dog already knows. It’s an added layer. I’ll have the E-Collar on my dog, and I may never even have to press the stimulation button on the remote, but, if my dog sees a deer, or a horse, and I call him and he gives me that look of, ‘What happens if I don’t come when I’m called?’, I have a safety net. The E-Collar is my safety net. All dogs, every single dog in the world will test boundaries with their owners. They may have a great recall, and then one day, their may be a bitch in heat nearby, or there may be a sheep, or a goat in the mountains, and your dog will take off after that. Knowing you can get your dog back under any level of distraction is a big enough pull for me to use the E-Collar in my training.The way we introduce the E-Collar is very simple. First, we make sure the dog has a marker word, for example, ‘YES’. We find the dogs working level, so we start at level 1 and move up until we see the dog give us some kind of signal that he can feel it. This is somewhat tricky so always consult a professional. Once we’re sure the dog feels the stimulation, we give him a food reward. We press it a couple of times, and reward.For recall, we have the dog on the long lead, and we press the remote, and say the command, ‘Herbie, Come!’, once the dog turns and comes, the stimulation shuts off. That, in its essence is how we condition and teach the dog the language of the E-Collar. The second they make the decision to turn our way, the stimulation goes off.For nervous, fearful and insecure dogs, this kind of training does wonders. This is not my own method by any means, and I’m going to paraphrase a bit here from an excellent trainer called Larry Krohn. Larry talks about insecure dogs and E-Collar training, and he explains why they respond so well. He says; ‘These fearful, and insecure dogs, have never had opportunity to win in their lives. They always lose. So when we start showing them that its in their power to turn off the E-Collar, we show them how they win. They start winning.’If you’re skeptical about the E-Collar, don’t worry. I’m not here to change your mind, but I am here to try an educate you, and offer some kind of knowledge on a tool thats hugely undermined in this country. Please do some research on solid E-Collar training. Look up videos of people introducing it to their dogs, watch some of Larry Krohn’s youtube videos, and watch how the dogs respond. The dogs can’t lie. Their body language can’t lie. Yes, the E-Collar can be aversive, and I’m not advocating that. But what I’m advocating is using low level stimulation to reinforce commands and behaviours. Before you make a judgement on whether the E-Collar is for you or not, please do two things. Firstly, find someone who uses one correctly, see it first hand, watch the dog, and watch how the handler uses it. And secondly, try it yourself. Feel the sensation, feel what the dog feels on your skin before you pass judgement.We’re so quick to hop on our chosen side of the fence before even tasting the cake on the other side. If you have had experience with the E-Collar, yet you don’t like it, that’s absolutely fine. But, experience it before coming to that conclusion.The main two reputable E-Collar brands are; Dogtra, and E-Collar technologies.These brands have a range of devices, some for the every day pet owner, and some for high level working dogs.Have a great week!If you liked this post from GoodBoy Dog Training's Weekly Newsletter, why not share it?Share© 2020 GoodBoy Dog Training Unsubscribe548 Market Street PMB 72296, San Francisco, CA 94104 |

A large black box on the side of a dogs neck that shocks him every time he leaves a certain parameter, or does a behaviour the owner doesn’t like. Let’s shock our dogs into not doing something. Let’s fill them with fear and send a pulsing electromagnetic field through their nervous system that debilitates them.

Now, you have to be pretty sick to want to do that to a dog. The days of using a shock collar on a dog for when they misbehave, are thankfully going. However, some folks are still stuck in the past, and left in the dark when it comes to the E-Collar. So let’s talk about it.

When I say to you ‘E-Collar’, your automatic response is probably ‘Shock Collar’. That’s OK. That’s all you’ve heard about it. The emotive human immediately pairs the most obvious electronic aversive in the world, (The Taser) to what they think an E-Collar is. When people don’t understand how the E-Collar works, how it functions, and what its used for, they jump to the defence of the dog. Which is normal, and good, to an extent. If you’re having a conversation about your dog, chances are you don’t want to harm it. If someone gets into dog training, chances are, they love dogs, and don’t want to harm them! So, why do some dog trainers use an E-Collar? Let’s discuss that in a moment, but first, its important to note that you get idiots everywhere. You’re going to get an anecdotal case about a man that shocked his dog and somehow injured it. People have also choked and whipped their dogs with leads and collars, but we don’t associate the lead with a negative connotations. Don’t let the ignorance, and belligerence of others tar your view on what, when used correctly, can be an amazing training tool.

The modern day E-Collar uses the same technology as a TENS machine. I’m sure you’ve felt it. It is by no means a shock. It is a stimulation. A feeling. A sensation. When I first put the E-Collar on my Mothers hand so she could feel it, she couldn't stop laughing, because she was preparing for a shock. All she felt was a very mild sensation. Now, there are inferior products on the market that will ‘shock’ your dog, but we stay well away from those.

The modern E-Collar isn’t cheap. It sits at around 200-400 euro. It’s an incredible piece of kit. The E-Collar has a range of levels, from 0-100 on most units. Why do you need multiple levels you may think? For safety and various other reasons. My car has a speedometer of 220Km/h, but I’ve never gone past 120Km/h.  
When we introduce the E-Collar to a dog, we find the dogs working level. This means the lowest possible stimulation the dog responds to. I wouldn’t in a million years have to go even near level 100 with my dog. To put some context behind it, my dog Herbie feels the sensation at level 5. The majority of dogs feel it between levels 4 and 7. Humans don’t tend to feel it until about 8 or 10. I didn’t feel it until level 11, my girlfriend didn’t feel it until 9. It ranges. A friend of mine works his dog on a level 3. These are extremely low levels. We want the dog to feel something, and that is it. We want them to FEEL SOMETHING. We don’t want them to be in pain, or to be frightened, and when introduced correctly, the E-Collar will make your dog come on leaps and bounds.

One of the reasons why I love the E-Collar is because of recall. Some skeptics may and say that if you use an E-Collar for recall your lazy, but I’ll protest against a claim like that. I want to know I can get my dog back to me when he’s off leash in every single scenario he’ll ever be in. Around other dogs, other wildlife, traffic, the list goes on. The reason why I go against a statement like ‘If you use an E-Collar for recall you don’t know how to train recall’, is because I don’t teach anything with the E-collar. Most people don’t. All the E-Collar does is reinforce commands and behaviours your dog already knows. It’s an added layer. I’ll have the E-Collar on my dog, and I may never even have to press the stimulation button on the remote, but, if my dog sees a deer, or a horse, and I call him and he gives me that look of, ‘What happens if I don’t come when I’m called?’, I have a safety net. The E-Collar is my safety net. All dogs, every single dog in the world will test boundaries with their owners. They may have a great recall, and then one day, their may be a bitch in heat nearby, or there may be a sheep, or a goat in the mountains, and your dog will take off after that. Knowing you can get your dog back under any level of distraction is a big enough pull for me to use the E-Collar in my training.

The way we introduce the E-Collar is very simple. First, we make sure the dog has a marker word, for example, ‘YES’. We find the dogs working level, so we start at level 1 and move up until we see the dog give us some kind of signal that he can feel it. This is somewhat tricky so always consult a professional. Once we’re sure the dog feels the stimulation, we give him a food reward. We press it a couple of times, and reward.

For recall, we have the dog on the long lead, and we press the remote, and say the command, ‘Herbie, Come!’, once the dog turns and comes, the stimulation shuts off. That, in its essence is how we condition and teach the dog the language of the E-Collar. The second they make the decision to turn our way, the stimulation goes off.  
For nervous, fearful and insecure dogs, this kind of training does wonders. This is not my own method by any means, and I’m going to paraphrase a bit here from an excellent trainer called Larry Krohn. Larry talks about insecure dogs and E-Collar training, and he explains why they respond so well. He says; ‘These fearful, and insecure dogs, have never had opportunity to win in their lives. They always lose. So when we start showing them that its in their power to turn off the E-Collar, we show them how they win. They start winning.’  
If you’re skeptical about the E-Collar, don’t worry. I’m not here to change your mind, but I am here to try an educate you, and offer some kind of knowledge on a tool thats hugely undermined in this country. Please do some research on solid E-Collar training. Look up videos of people introducing it to their dogs, watch some of Larry Krohn’s youtube videos, and watch how the dogs respond. The dogs can’t lie. Their body language can’t lie. Yes, the E-Collar can be aversive, and I’m not advocating that. But what I’m advocating is using low level stimulation to reinforce commands and behaviours. Before you make a judgement on whether the E-Collar is for you or not, please do two things. Firstly, find someone who uses one correctly, see it first hand, watch the dog, and watch how the handler uses it. And secondly, try it yourself. Feel the sensation, feel what the dog feels on your skin before you pass judgement.  
We’re so quick to hop on our chosen side of the fence before even tasting the cake on the other side. If you have had experience with the E-Collar, yet you don’t like it, that’s absolutely fine. But, experience it before coming to that conclusion.

The main two reputable E-Collar brands are; Dogtra, and E-Collar technologies.

These brands have a range of devices, some for the every day pet owner, and some for high level working dogs.

Have a great week!